<div align="justify">

## **Abstract**

Predicting the original mass of a retouched scraper has long been a
major goal in lithic analysis. It is commonly linked to lithic
technological organization of past societies along with notions of stone
tool general morphology, standardization through the reduction process,
use life, and site occupation patterns. In order to obtain a prediction
of original stone tool mass, previous studies have focused on attributes
that would remain constant or unaltered through retouch episodes.
However, these approaches have provided limited success for predictions
and have also remained untested in the framework of successive
resharpening episodes. In the research presented here, a set of
experimentally knapped flint flakes were successively resharpened as
scraper types. After each resharpening episode, four attributes were
recorded (scraper mass, height of retouch, maximum thickness and the
GIUR index). Four machine learning models were trained using these
variables in order to estimate the mass of the flake prior to any
retouch. A Random Forest model provided the best results with an r2
value of 0.97 when predicting original flake mass, and a r2 value of
0.84 when predicting percentage of mass lost by retouch. The Random
Forest model has been integrated into an open source and free to use
Shiny app. This allows for the wide spread implementation of a highly
precise machine learning model for predicting initial mass of flake
blanks successively retouched into scrapers.

**Key words:** experimental archaeology; lithic reduction; flake mass;
machine learning.  
\# **Introduction**

Scrapers are some of the most common lithic implements among
archaeological lithic assemblages. They are present from the first
Oldowan stone tools
\[[1](#ref-barsky_early_2011)–[3](#ref-semaw_26-million-year-old_2003)\]
through to modern ethnographic studies of hunter gatherers

# **References**

</div>

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-barsky_early_2011" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">1.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Barsky D, Chapon-Sao C, Bahain
J-J, Beyene Y, Cauche D, Celiberti V, et al. The Early Oldowan
Stone-Tool Assemblage from Fejej FJ-1A, Ethiopia. Journal of African
Archaeology. 2011;9: 207–224.
doi:[10.3213/2191-5784-10196](https://doi.org/10.3213/2191-5784-10196)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-sahnouni_further_2002" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">2.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Sahnouni M. Further research at
the Oldowan site of Ain Hanech, North-eastern Algeria. Journal of Human
Evolution. 2002;43: 925–937.
doi:[10.1006/jhev.2002.0608](https://doi.org/10.1006/jhev.2002.0608)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-semaw_26-million-year-old_2003" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">3.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Semaw S, Rogers MJ, Quade J, Renne
PR, Butler RF, Dominguez-Rodrigo M, et al. 2.6-Million-year-old stone
tools and associated bones from OGS-6 and OGS-7, Gona, Afar, Ethiopia.
Journal of Human Evolution. 2003;45: 169–177.
doi:[10.1016/S0047-2484(03)00093-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2484(03)00093-9)</span>

</div>

</div>
